GeoVoCamp2015DC
EminencesODP
2015-11-30 to 2015-12-02
=========
Organizer:
Gaurav Sinha (Ohio University)
=========
Participants:
Samantha Arundel (USGS CEGIS)
Chen-Chieh from NUS (Singapore & UIUC)
Joshua Lieberman (Harvard)
Briana Sullivan (University of New Hampshire)
David Mark (University of Buffalo)
Richard Markeloff (Raytheon BBN Technologies)
Boleslo E. Romero (UCSB)
Lynn Usery (USGS)
On phone:
Ouida?
Kathleen Stewart?
Alex Sorokine?
Nancy Wiengard?
=========
Notes (by BER)
=========

Topographic Eminences
	Topographic may not be correct term for just 'land' features
	
Topic was first posed as feature extraction work
Topic was reframed as types in current taxonomies

Various taxonomies available sometimes related
GNIS from USGS only features
SDTS partially from GNIS, GeoNames
GeoNames partially from Nat map. agencies
SDTS was multiagency, but too complicated for significant uptake

Perhaps Neural Networks could help with matching eminence terms to geometry
USGS working on how to label mountains, from manual polygons

Issues with lidar, image point clouds, due to scale issues
Can surface network be pruned to reduce noise?

Using parts of a proper name will not always find the type

Using metrics describing the relation of a value to the value of surrounding region will not always find eminence types

Start with eminences as raised above surrounding region
	What about eminences on side of mountain in another dimension (i.e. not top of feature)

Need description of entity types:
	Form
	Material
	Geographic context
		local (with respect to other named features)
		regional (with respect to climatic vars and process, etc)

	Classification (some independent, some combined)
		Relative height (of what? summit and surroundings?)
		Curvature
			plan
			profile
		Slope
		Size
			Horizontal spatial extent
			(Elevation)
						
Language issues
	Semantic similarity of names of types
	People's known terms (from culture?)
	Cultural features of small size which control larger domain

Can we constrain scale to generic 'geographic' space, what can be seen?

Maybe classify all locatioons as a feature
Or, use a fuzzy approach
	Likely use more criteria than elevation
	
Benefit of elevation is that it is defensible and cognitively simple

There is the overlap of terms may be challenge or benefit (e.g. location on hillslope also on basin slope)

--------

Important concepts, objects, and properties ...

	Description of entity types
		Form
		Material – physical
		Geographical context
			Local
			Regional
	Classification
		Relative height
		Curvature
			Profile
			Plan
		Slope

	Form
		Sharp
		Rounded
		Flat
	Size
		Horizontal extent
		Proportion to vertical extent
	Observation (human view)
	Scale – constrained to geographic

--------

Need to demonstrate purpose/benefits of ODP/Semantic Markup, especially beyond capabilities provided by GIS

Axioms, use cases, and competency questions needed

--------
Summary of Concept Map:

Macro properties allow recognition of types of eminences
Wanted to take out buildings, etc (tried process, material, etc. to no avail)
Instead use term for reference to 'planetary surface'
However, need more than surface to include volume
Actually need to get from surface to volume
So the term 'region' was considered, but decided 'part' was a more useful generic term
There are cases where top part of larger eminence can be a smaller eminence
(There may be a possibility of using surface network courses or  contours of passes as delimiters of an eminence)
(We also need to continue the values of 'nested contour regions'--base, sides, peak--to help discriminate types of eminences)
(Comment: how to handle scale to discriminate an eminence? ... eminences are relative to planetary surface)
Evaluated GeoNames in concept map (Mountain, hill, ridge)
Removed specific values of qualities/properties
Have not encoded, but recognize ordinal relations of properties/values of eminence types
Values of properties help to discriminate different eminence types
Concerned about having names guide the identification of properties and values
Two aims for use of properties and values are to automate classification and query instances
===========

Can an eminence be just the top part of a larger eminence?
	(e.g. a break in slope allows a smaller, upper eminence of a larger feature beneath, especially from the view at the break in slope.)
Eminences are considered one of many other types of landforms.
Every eminence must also be a type of eminence, however, algorithms that only find eminences without classifying them as particular types are acceptable.
The types of eminences (e.g. mountains, hills, ridges) are subclasses/categories of the super-ordinate 'eminence' convexities.
So, can parts of a larger eminence be an eminence of its own? (esp. without a break in slope). In that mind, the top may be 'sliced' at any of various elevations.
If considering North America an eminence, then there are many eminences upon it, though it may be considered a complex eminence.
Perhaps bases, inflection points, or visual markers may help to define an eminence recognized by a group of people.
Need to define parts at some point (for example, but not a a full or correct set of terms, a top, side, and base).
It is also important to look at other eminence types (ridges, etc.) to potentially discover other parts/relations.
Perhaps try the pattern to find types in GeoNames or SDTS.
Will types only be English, or other languages/cultures/dialects?
Guarav will take lead, though many papers possible, but may need to partition topics to allow participants to publish various pieces.
Josh (and maybe Dave Kolas, or Torsten) may help with OWL.
Maybe also align with BFO and Dolce.